---
layout: post
title: Adding A 3rd Dimension To My API Monetization Thinking
image: https://s3.amazonaws.com/kinlane-productions2/bw-icons/bw-dimensions.png
author:
  name: kinlane
tags:
  - My
  - Monetization
  - ddi
---
When it comes to the API space, it always takes numerous conversations with API providers and practitioners, before something comes into focus for me. I've spent five years having [API management](http://management.apievangelist.com) conversations, an area that is very much in focus for me when it comes to my own infrastructure, as well as using as a metric for reviewing the other public and private APIs that I review regularly.

While I have been paying attention to [API monetization](http://monetization.apievangelist.com) for a couple years now (thank you [@johnmusser](https://twitter.com/johnmusser)), in 2015 I find myself involved in 20+ conversations, forcing the topic to slowly come into focus for me, whether I like it or not. When talking to companies and organizations about how they can generate revenue from their APIs, I generally find the conversation going in one of two directions:

*   **Resource** - We will be directly monetizing whatever resource we are making available via the API. Charging for access to the resource, and composing of multiple access tiers depending on volume, and partnerships.
*   **Technology** - We believe the technology behind the API platform is where the money is, and will be charging for others to use this technology. Resulting in a growing wholesale / private label layer to the API economy. 

90% of the conversation I engage in are focused in the first area, and how to make money off API access to a resource. The discussion is almost always about what someone will pay for a resource, something that is more art than science--even in 2015. The answer is, we don't know until there is a precedent, resulting in an imbalance where developers expect things for free, and providers freak the fuck out--then call me. ;-)

[As more of my thoughts around API monetization solidfy](http://apievangelist.com/2015/09/08/catching-my-breath-on-my-api-monetization-ramblings-before-i-enter-into-some-new-conversations/), a third dimension is slowly coming into focus, one that won't exist for all API providers (especially those without consumers), but is something I think should be considered as part of a long term roadmap.

*   **Exhaust** - Capture, and make accessible the logs, usage, tooling, and other resources that are developed and captured through the course of API operations, and make available in a self-service, pay as you go approach.

There are many ways you can capture the exhaust around API operations, and sell access to it. This is where the ethics of APIs come into play--you either do this right, or you do it in a way that exploits everything along the way. This could be as simple as providing an API endpoint for accessing search terms executed against an API, all the way to providing a franchise model around the underlying technology behind an API, with all the resources someone needs to get up and running with their own version of an API. If you are very short-sighted this could be just about selling all your exhaust, behind the scenes to your partners and investors.

To me this is all about stepping back, and looking at the big picture. If you can't figure out a theoretical, 3rd dimension strategy for making money off the exhaust generated by the resource you are making available via an API, and the underlying technology used to do so